# Application Layer Protocol

- The application layer provides several protocols which allow any software to easily send and receive information and present meaningful data to its users.

## The following are some of the protocols which are provided by the application layer.

1. <b>TELNET:</b> Telnet stands for Telecommunications Network. This protocol is used for managing files over the Internet. It allows the Telnet clients to access the resources of Telnet server. Telnet uses port number 23.

2. <b>DNS:</b> DNS stands for Domain Name System. The DNS service translates the domain name (selected by user) into the corresponding IP address. For example- If you choose the domain name as www.abcd.com, then DNS must translate it as 192.36.20.8 (random IP address written just for understanding purposes). DNS protocol uses the port number 53.

3. <b>DHCP:</b> DHCP stands for Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol. It provides IP addresses to hosts. Whenever a host tries to register for an IP address with the DHCP server, DHCP server provides lots of information to the corresponding host. DHCP uses port numbers 67 and 68.

4. <b>FTP:</b> FTP stands for File Transfer Protocol. This protocol helps to transfer different files from one device to another. FTP promotes sharing of files via remote computer devices with reliable, efficient data transfer. FTP uses port number 20 for data access and port number 21 for data control.

5. <b>SMTP:</b> SMTP stands for Simple Mail Transfer Protocol. It is used to transfer electronic mail from one user to another user. SMTP is used by end users to send emails with ease. SMTP uses port numbers 25 and 587.

6. <b>HTTP:</b> HTTP stands for Hyper Text Transfer Protocol. It is the foundation of the World Wide Web (WWW). HTTP works on the client server model. This protocol is used for transmitting hypermedia documents like HTML. This protocol was designed particularly for the communications between the web browsers and web servers, but this protocol can also be used for several other purposes. HTTP is a stateless protocol (network protocol in which a client sends requests to server and server responses back as per the given state), which means the server is not responsible for maintaining the previous client’s requests. HTTP uses port number 80.

7. <b>NFS:</b> NFS stands for Network File System. This protocol allows remote hosts to mount files over a network and interact with those file systems as though they are mounted locally. NFS uses the port number 2049.

8. <b>SNMP:</b> SNMP stands for Simple Network Management Protocol. This protocol gathers data by polling the devices from the network to the management station at fixed or random intervals, requiring them to disclose certain information. SNMP uses port numbers 161 (TCP) and 162 (UDP).
