# HTTP

- Stands for Hyper Text Transfer Protocol
- Web Server is HTTP server.
- Web Browser is HTTP client.
- HTTP protocol generally takes place over TCP connection.
- It listens on port 80.
- In HTTP, clients sends a HTTP request and server sends backs HTTP response.
- HTTP is stateless.


## Client Server Model
- A server is a process that offers some service.
- A client is a process that is requesting the service.
- Server waits for clients to get the request.

## HTTP Request and Response Message
### a. HTTP Request Message
1. Request Line
2. Headers
3. A blank Line
4. Body

### a. HTTP Response Message
1. Status Line
2. Headers
3. A blank Line
4. Body

## HTTP Methods
1. Get - Requests data from the server
2. HEAD - Requests information about a data but not the data itself.
3. POST - Sends some data to the server
4. PUT - Updates some data to the server
5. TRACE - Echoes the incoming request
6. CONNECT - Reserved
7. OPTION - Inquires about available options

## HTTP Status Code
1. Informational
- 100 - Continue
- 101 - Switching

2. Success
- 200 - OK : The request is successful
- 201 - Created : A new URL is created.
- 202 - Accepted : The request is accepted but it - is not immediately acted upon.
- 204 - No content : There is no content in the body.

3. Redirection

- 301 - Moved Permanently : The requested URL is no longer used by the server.
- 302 - Moved Temporarily : The requested URL has moved temporarily.
- 304 - Not modified : The document has not been modified.

4. Client Error

- 400 - Bad Request : There is a error in the request.
- 401 - Unauthorized : The request lacks proper authorization.
- 403 - Forbidden : Service is denied.
- 404 - Not Found : The document is not found.
- 405 - Method not allowed : This method is not supported in the URL.
- 406 - Not acceptable : The format reqested is not acceptable.

5. Server Error

- 500 - Internal Server Error : There is an error at the server side.
- 501 - Not implemented : The action requeted cannot be performed.
- 503 - Service unavaible : The service is temporarily unavailable, but may be requested in the future.

### HTTP Request Header

1. Cache-control : Specifies information about caching.
2. Connection : Shows whether the connection should be closed or not.
3. Date : Shows the current date.
4. MIME-version : Shows the MIME version used.
5. Upgrade : Specifies the preferred communication protocol.
6. Accept
7. Accept-charset
8. Accept-language
9. Authorization
10. User-agent, etc

### HTTP Response Headers
1. Accept-range
2. Age
3. Public
4. Retry-after
5. Server

### HTTP Entity Headers
1. Allow
2. Content-encoding
3. Content-language
4. Content-length
5. Content-range
6. Content-type
7. Expires
8. Last-modified
9. Location

### HTTP1 vs HTTP2
- HTTP2 is much faster and more reliable than HTTP1. 
- HTTP1 loads a single request for every TCP connection, while HTTP2 avoids network delay by using multiplexing.
