# Introduction to Kubernetes (K8S)

- Kubernetes is container orchestration system.
- It takes care of:
    - Automatic deployment of the containerized application accross different servers.
    - Distribute load accross different multiple servers.
    - Auto-scaling of the deployed application.
    - Monitoring and health check of the containers.
    - Replacement of failed containers.

## Supported Container Runtimes

- Docker
- CRI-0
- containerd

## Pod

- Pod is the smallest unit of kubernetes world. Just like in docker, we have smallest unit : container.
- A pod contains multiple containers, shared volumes, shared IP address.
- One container per pod is the most common use case.
- A pod will be in one single server not distributed in multiple server.

## Kubernetes Cluster

- A kubernetes cluster consists of one or more nodes. A node is basically a server.
- Nodes can be kepts at different data centers, availablity zones but usually they are kept close to each other for better performance.
- A node contains multiple pods. A pod contains multiple containers.
- In kubernetes cluster, there are two types of nodes: master node and worker node. The master node manages all the worker nodes.
- A master node is also called control plane.

## Kubernetes Services

- There are some common services that runs on worker/master nodes. They are kubelet, kube-proxy, container-runtime (Docker / CRI-O/ Containerd).
- In the master node, there is one service running named "API Server" that communicates with kubelet. This API Server is the main point of communication between multiple nodes.
- Kube-proxy is responsible for network communication inside the node and between multiple nodes.
- There are also some other services running in the master node.
    - Scheduler : It manages and distributes loads accross multiple nodes.
    - Kube Control Manager : It controls what happens in each node of the cluster.
    - Cloud Control Manager : For running kubenetes in cloud (AWS, Azure, GCP).
    - etcd : It stores logs of entire kubenetes cluster. Such logs are stored in key-value pais.
    - DNS : For domain name resolution in the kubenetes cluster.


## Cluster Management

- Cluster management is done by kubectl.
- Kubectl is a command line tool that allows you to connect to remote kubernetes cluster and manage it locally.
- It establishes HTTPS connection with API Server of master node so that we can manage the cluster.


## MiniKube

- Creates a kubernetes cluster with single node.

- Start the kubernetes cluster with docker

```
minikube start --driver=docker
```

- Log in the kubernetes cluster

```
minikube ssh
```