# Introduction to Database Management System

### Database

- Collection of inter-related data organized in the form of a table, schemas, views etc
- Types of database:
    - Centralized Database
    - Distributed Database
    - Relational Database
    - Non-relational database (NoSQL)
    - Cloud Database
    - Object Oriented Database
    - Hierarchial Database
    - Network Database
    - Personal Database
    - Operational Database
    - Enterprise Database

---

### Database Management System

- A software to manage database.
- Provides an interface to perform various operations like database creation, updation, deletion, table creation, updation, deletion etc.

### Relational Database Management System

- Uses table to store data
- Example: MySQL, Postgres, etc

---

### Some Terminologies:

- Table:

    - Collection of related data enteries
    - Contains rows and columns to store data

- Row:

    - Horizontal entity in table
    - Contains specific information about every record in table.

- Columns:
    - Vertical Entity in table
    - Contains all information assosicated with a specific field in table.

---

### Data Integrity:

1. <b>Entity Integrity</b>: It specifies that there should be no duplicate rows in a table.

2. <b>Domain Integrity</b>: It enforces valid entries for a given column by restricting the type, the format or, the range of values.

3. <b>Referential Integrity</b>: It specifies that rows cann't be deleted which are used by other records.

4. <b>User-defined Integrity</b>: It enforces some specific business rules that are defined by the users.
